Servant Leadership
“They don’t care how much you know until they know how much you care.”

Congratulations! You are now a servant to your team. Or to be more precise, you are now a leader with a servant’s heart.

The principles of servant leadership are simple, but most people in leadership positions struggle to give up power. 
Your job is NOT to be above your people to boss them around, to solve the technical problems on your own, to micromanage them, or to exercise command-and-control. 
You don’t command, but persuade. You put your team before yourself. And during all that, you act with humility.

You are at this position to help them become their best, and work harmoniously and productively. Ideally, you are to become a multiplier by helping your team reach higher levels of productivity.


Communication

The root cause of most of the managerial problems that I’ve witnessed in my career has been communication. It is probably very difficult to become a good leader without being a competent communicator first. This is another area that you may need to work on.

Whenever you have the option, chose face-to-face communication. For most of us, the written medium is not the best way to convey all the intricacies of our thinking. When communicating, you would want to be able to read the body language of your interlocutor(s), and react accordingly.


Transparency
Transparency is the main pillar that supports the trust and the fellowship that a good leader strives to build.
	- honest and straightforward employee


Trust Your People
As I mentioned under the Servant Leadership section, you are not here to solve all the problems on your own. Convey your vision, communicate the mission, and trust your people in their execution.

For this to work, you have to communicate well so that your team does the right thing. You also need to develop your team’s skills so that they do things right.

There’s another aspect to this: you need an environment where failing is not seen as the end of all things. At first, it may seem counterintuitive to make your people feel that they are safe if they fail, but how else you can encourage them to be creative and show their full potential? And if they happen, failures must be part of the feedback loop, and part of the triggers that make the continuous improvement wheel turn.

Let them fail, but don’t let them be failures.


Leading by Example
“What you are speaks so loudly, I can’t hear what you are saying.” ― Ralph Waldo Emerson

You are your own best tool in influencing your team. It’s not what you say, but it’s mostly what you do that sends the right (or the wrong) signals to your team. Your actions will indicate what matters the most. What you measure, recognize and reward will be your team’s focus.

I usually summarize these points by the leading by example concept. The non-verbal messages that you will be sending with your behavior speak much more loudly than your words. For example, if you want them to know the importance of being punctual, you always have to be on time for your team meetings or one-on-ones.


Motivation & Engagement
At its core, life is about having pleasant experiences. Therefore it’s no surprise that happy people are more productive.

You are there to ensure that your team’s motivation and engagement are at a high level. Be careful! One can be motivated but not engaged. You need to understand the differences, and different ways to increase them when necessary or maintain them at an appropriate level.

Naturally, paying attention to this article’s other points would create a healthier environment for motivation and engagement to develop. For instance, being a good communicator, being approachable and responsive, and holding regular one-on-ones will greatly increase your efficiency in motivating your employees and creating better engagement.

Also, don’t assume that your people are motivated by the same things that motivate you. Use one-on-ones to discover theirs.


Empathy
Empathy is the experience of understanding another person’s condition from their perspective. It is not difficult to see why a well-honed ability to put one’s self into another’s shoes would be considered an important leadership skill.


Personal Development
“Leaders don’t create followers. They create more leaders.” ― Tom Peters

We touched on this briefly in the section on one-on-ones. I believe that putting focus on personal development is one of the best ways to keep your team members happy, motivated and engaged.

This may feel counter intuitive at first: You have to ensure that your people become good enough to be able to find plenty of jobs elsewhere and leave your company, but you also have to ensure that they wouldn’t want to leave.

“Train people well enough so they can leave. Treat them well enough so they don’t want to.” ― Richard Branson


Be Yourself
At first, this one might seem obvious, and even a little irrelevant. But hear me out!

One day you were working with your peers and team members, the next day you come back to the office as their manager, and you’re hoping to become their leader. At this point, it would be easy to fall into the trap of creating a new persona and start playing the boss. Unfortunately, this is guaranteed to fail. Do you remember what we mentioned above? Your job is not to boss people around, and create a command-and-control structure. Your job is to create an environment where they can become better.


Be Humble
Develop a beginner’s mind!

At the start of this article, I mentioned that I’ve been lucky to work with some amazing men and women. I’ve learned so much from them. Guess what? I was the manager of most of them. It’s crazy how much you can learn from your people if you truly listen and have a beginner’s mind.